pages/posts/swr.mdx, before:

---
title: How Does SWR Work?
tags:
  - react
  - hooks
  - javascript
date: 2019-12-15
excerpt: SWR is a great package from Zeit to help make it easier to fetch remote data with hooks. It is based on the stale-while-revalidate RFC.
---

[SWR](https://swr.now.sh/) is a great package from [Zeit](http://zeit.co/) to help make it easier to fetch remote data with hooks. It is based on the [stale-while-revalidate](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5861) RFC, which in simple terms says to show stale (old) data while you are fetching a new version of the data. The idea is that it is better to show something old if you have it rather than a blank screen.

We will show how to use SWR, how to configure it globally, and a pattern I like to use which separates data fetching from data display.

<YouTube id='oWVW8IqpQ-A' />

Code is available at: [https://github.com/leighhalliday/crime-mapping](https://github.com/leighhalliday/crime-mapping)

## An SWR Fetcher

The `useSWR` hook requires two things to make it work:

```js
useSWR("/crimes/passion", fetcher);
```

- A key: This is a little vague, but think it if as something that uniquely identifies the data you want to fetch... which for a RESTful API endpoint can be the URL.
- A fetcher: This is a function who will do the work of making the actual API request. In our case we'll be using [fetch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API), but you could use [axios](https://github.com/axios/axios) if you prefer. Its only requirement is that it returns a promise which resolves the data you are fetching.

The fetcher we'll be working with receives the incoming arguments (in our case the URL), passes them on to `fetch`, and then resolves the response to produce JSON.

```js
const fetcher = (...args) => fetch(...args).then((res) => res.json());
```

## Global Config Provider

Rather than having to pass the `fetcher` function, and any other config options you may want to set on every call to the `useSWR` hook, you can wrap your components with a provider called `SWRConfig`. This allows you to globally set config options to be used with every `useSWR` hook call. In our example we'll pass the fetcher function to it so it can be used globally.

```jsx
export default function App() {
  return (
    <SWRConfig value={{ fetcher }}>
      <Crimes />
    </SWRConfig>
  );
}
```

## Separating Data From Display

When working with data, be it GraphQL or data from a REST API, I like to separate out data fetching logic from display logic. We'll be doing the same here in this example, and the psuedo-code/logic looks like:

```jsx
function Crimes() {
  // fetch data
  // handle errors
  // handle loading state
  // render display component
}

function DisplayCrimes({ crimes }) {
  // only have to deal with displaying data
}
```

Separating data from display also allows you to test visual changes in isolation, useful for testing or showing how the component would look like in [Storybook](https://storybook.js.org/) without having to mock all of your API calls.

## Fetching Data

Because we are using `SWRConfig` to configure our `useSWR` hook calls globally, we don't have to worry about passing the fetcher function to this hook, we only have to worry about passing our "key" (URL to fetch the data). As a response we get an object that we can extract `{data, error}` from.

After dealing with error states and lack of data (loading state), we are now ready to pass the data onto our `DisplayCrimes` component whose job is to simply render the fetched data.

```jsx
function Crimes() {
  const url = "https://data.police.uk/api/crimes-street/all-crime?lat=52.629729&lng=-1.131592&date=2019-10";
  const { data, error } = useSWR(url);

  if (error) return <div>Error...</div>;
  if (!data) return <div>Loading...</div>;

  return <DisplayCrimes crimes={data} categories={[...new Set(data.map((crime) => crime.category))]} />;
}
```

### Unique Values in JavaScript

In order to display (and filter) the crime data, I want a unique list of the crime categories. JavaScript doesn't have a way to do this out of the box like you might do `values.uniq` in Ruby. We can make our own very quickly though using a [Set](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set).

```js
// find all categories
const allCategories = data.map((crime) => crime.category);
// convert all categories into a set
const categorySet = new Set(allCategories);
// convert set back to an array
const categories = [...categorySet];

// final/shortened solution
[...new Set(data.map((crime) => crime.category))];
```

## Displaying & Filtering Data

Displaying the data really has nothing to do with SWR at this point, but that is sort of the point. The display logic shouldn't really care where the data comes from, only how to display it to the user.

We will keep track of a `filterCategory` if the user wants only a subset of all the crimes, producing a filtered list of crimes using the [array filter](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter) function.

```jsx
function DisplayCrimes({ crimes, categories }) {
  const [filterCategory, setFilterCategory] = React.useState(null);
  const filteredCrimes = filterCategory ? crimes.filter((crime) => crime.category === filterCategory) : crimes;

  return (
    <>
      {categories.map((category) => (
        <button
          onClick={() => {
            setFilterCategory(category);
          }}
          key={category}
        >
          {category}
        </button>
      ))}
      {filterCategory && (
        <button
          onClick={() => {
            setFilterCategory(null);
          }}
        >
          reset
        </button>
      )}

      <pre>{JSON.stringify(filteredCrimes, null, 2)}</pre>
    </>
  );
}
```

## Conclusion

Based on my experience with the SWR package, I think it would be my go-to approach when working with RESTful APIs in React. That said, I don't think I would switch from Apollo if my data were coming from GraphQL. Apollo provides a lot of nice utilities specific to GraphQL that you wouldn't get with SWR, which admittedly is a lower-level tool that you could build on top of.

Commit message:

añadiendo detalles page de blog post

pages/posts/swr.mdx, after:

---
title: How Does SWR Work?
tags:
  - react
  - hooks
  - javascript
date: 2022-12-15
excerpt: SWR is a great package from Zeit to help make it easier to fetch remote data with hooks. It is based on the stale-while-revalidate RFC. In this post, I'll explain how it works.
descriptionSEO: SWR is a great package to help make it easier to fetch remote data with hooks. It is based on the stale-while-revalidate RFC.
imageSEO: servicios.jpg
coverImageSrc: blogimageGirl.jpg
coverImageAlt: Empleada de contrucción revisando su tableta
authorAvatar: avatarPerson.jpg
authorName: Luis Villa
articleType: articulo
---

[SWR](https://swr.now.sh/) is a great package from [Zeit](http://zeit.co/) to help make it easier to fetch remote data with hooks. It is based on the [stale-while-revalidate](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5861) RFC, which in simple terms says to show stale (old) data while you are fetching a new version of the data. The idea is that it is better to show something old if you have it rather than a blank screen.

We will show how to use SWR, how to configure it globally, and a pattern I like to use which separates data fetching from data display.

<YouTube id='oWVW8IqpQ-A' />

Code is available at: [https://github.com/leighhalliday/crime-mapping](https://github.com/leighhalliday/crime-mapping)

## An SWR Fetcher

The `useSWR` hook requires two things to make it work:

```js
useSWR("/crimes/passion", fetcher);
```

- A key: This is a little vague, but think it if as something that uniquely identifies the data you want to fetch... which for a RESTful API endpoint can be the URL.
- A fetcher: This is a function who will do the work of making the actual API request. In our case we'll be using [fetch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API), but you could use [axios](https://github.com/axios/axios) if you prefer. Its only requirement is that it returns a promise which resolves the data you are fetching.

The fetcher we'll be working with receives the incoming arguments (in our case the URL), passes them on to `fetch`, and then resolves the response to produce JSON.

```js
const fetcher = (...args) => fetch(...args).then((res) => res.json());
```

## Global Config Provider

Rather than having to pass the `fetcher` function, and any other config options you may want to set on every call to the `useSWR` hook, you can wrap your components with a provider called `SWRConfig`. This allows you to globally set config options to be used with every `useSWR` hook call. In our example we'll pass the fetcher function to it so it can be used globally.

```jsx
export default function App() {
  return (
    <SWRConfig value={{ fetcher }}>
      <Crimes />
    </SWRConfig>
  );
}
```

## Separating Data From Display

When working with data, be it GraphQL or data from a REST API, I like to separate out data fetching logic from display logic. We'll be doing the same here in this example, and the psuedo-code/logic looks like:

```jsx
function Crimes() {
  // fetch data
  // handle errors
  // handle loading state
  // render display component
}

function DisplayCrimes({ crimes }) {
  // only have to deal with displaying data
}
```

Separating data from display also allows you to test visual changes in isolation, useful for testing or showing how the component would look like in [Storybook](https://storybook.js.org/) without having to mock all of your API calls.

## Fetching Data

Because we are using `SWRConfig` to configure our `useSWR` hook calls globally, we don't have to worry about passing the fetcher function to this hook, we only have to worry about passing our "key" (URL to fetch the data). As a response we get an object that we can extract `{data, error}` from.

After dealing with error states and lack of data (loading state), we are now ready to pass the data onto our `DisplayCrimes` component whose job is to simply render the fetched data.

```jsx
function Crimes() {
  const url = "https://data.police.uk/api/crimes-street/all-crime?lat=52.629729&lng=-1.131592&date=2019-10";
  const { data, error } = useSWR(url);

  if (error) return <div>Error...</div>;
  if (!data) return <div>Loading...</div>;

  return <DisplayCrimes crimes={data} categories={[...new Set(data.map((crime) => crime.category))]} />;
}
```

### Unique Values in JavaScript

In order to display (and filter) the crime data, I want a unique list of the crime categories. JavaScript doesn't have a way to do this out of the box like you might do `values.uniq` in Ruby. We can make our own very quickly though using a [Set](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set).

```js
// find all categories
const allCategories = data.map((crime) => crime.category);
// convert all categories into a set
const categorySet = new Set(allCategories);
// convert set back to an array
const categories = [...categorySet];

// final/shortened solution
[...new Set(data.map((crime) => crime.category))];
```

## Displaying & Filtering Data

Displaying the data really has nothing to do with SWR at this point, but that is sort of the point. The display logic shouldn't really care where the data comes from, only how to display it to the user.

We will keep track of a `filterCategory` if the user wants only a subset of all the crimes, producing a filtered list of crimes using the [array filter](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter) function.

```jsx
function DisplayCrimes({ crimes, categories }) {
  const [filterCategory, setFilterCategory] = React.useState(null);
  const filteredCrimes = filterCategory ? crimes.filter((crime) => crime.category === filterCategory) : crimes;

  return (
    <>
      {categories.map((category) => (
        <button
          onClick={() => {
            setFilterCategory(category);
          }}
          key={category}
        >
          {category}
        </button>
      ))}
      {filterCategory && (
        <button
          onClick={() => {
            setFilterCategory(null);
          }}
        >
          reset
        </button>
      )}

      <pre>{JSON.stringify(filteredCrimes, null, 2)}</pre>
    </>
  );
}
```

## Conclusion

Based on my experience with the SWR package, I think it would be my go-to approach when working with RESTful APIs in React. That said, I don't think I would switch from Apollo if my data were coming from GraphQL. Apollo provides a lot of nice utilities specific to GraphQL that you wouldn't get with SWR, which admittedly is a lower-level tool that you could build on top of.
